wget..command line tool is commonly used for downloading files in linux
touch..used to create an empty file
22..port is normally required to be open for secure remote interactive shell access to linux systems
:q!...when using vi or vim to edit a file, how do u exit without saving
ssh-keygen...utility is used to create public and private key pairs for SSH authentication
chmod.. to change permissions of file using lnux 
head.... Display the first few lines of a file in linux
ssh... Protocol is commonly used for secure remote access to servers
systemctl.... used to manage services in linux
ifconfig.. is used to view network configuration in linux
rm-r...to remove a directory and its content in linux
man ...used to display the manual for a specific command in linux
useradd..to add a new user in Centos
chown...to chnage the ownership of a file/folder
cat/etc/*release...how can you find OS distro of a linux server
/etc/sudoers... file contains the sudo configuration in linux
------------------
1.TO reload the configuration of a running service without stopping it, which systemctl command is used?
systemctlreloadservice_name

2. If u create a hardlink to a file and then delete the original file, what happens to the hard link?
The hardlink is uneffected

3. which type of link requires additional storage space for its metadata?
softlinks

4. In DNS what does the term TTL stands for?
Time to live

5. Which record type in DNS maps a domain name to an IP address?
A

6. How do u create a symbolic link in linux?
ln-S

7. What service does AWS Route53 provide?
DNS

8. How does a reverse proxy server route incoming requests?
By routing requests to appropriate backend servers.

9.What does the ln command do in linux?
Create hardlinks between files.

10. what does a CNAME record in DNS stand for?
Canonical name

11. What does a CNAME record map a domain name to?
Another Domain

12. What does a CNAME record allow you to do?
Redirect one domain to another

13. How do you rename a file in linux?
MV

14. How do u display the disk space usage of a filr or directory in linux?
DU -H

15. What does the command  df-h do in linux?
Display disck usage statistics in human readable format

16. How do u view the contents of a file in reverse order in linux?
tac
-------------------------
1. How do u specify a custom SSH key file when connecting to a server?
ssh-i custom_key

2. Which special variable represents the exit status of the last executed command?
$? for exit status

3. Special variable	$$ represents?
PID of the script

4.How can you append the output of a command to an existing file in the shell?
command>>file

5. Which loop construct is used for iterating over a range of numbers in Bash?
for loop

6. What is the purpose of the && operator in a shell script command line?
and condition

7.What is proper variable declaration in shell?
A=10

8. How do you execute command and take output inside the shell?
result=$(command)

9. Which redirection represents success output?
1>>$LOGFILE

10. How do you pass command line arguments to a shell script?
scrpt-name arg1arg2...argn

11. Does Shell script idempotent in nature?
No... We need to take manually

12. How do u read input from the user in shell scripting?
read

13. Which special variable in shell scripting stores the process ID of the las background command?
$!

14. Which special variable in shell scripting represents the name of the shell or shell script?
$0

15. Which code represents the red color
31
---------------------------
1. What is idempotency in the context of shell scipting?
To execute a script multiple times without changing the system state

2. How do you call another sheel script from within a shell script?
Source

3. What is the purpose of the set command in shell scripting?
sets scripts parameters and options

4. How to you schedule a task to run periodically using crontab?
crontab-e

5. what command is used to check disk usage in shell script?
df

6. How to send an email from a linux server in a shell script?
mail

7. what does idempotency ensure in shell scripting?
Consistent system state after script execution

c`8. How do you set a parameter in a shell script?
export

9. What is the purpose of error handling in shell scripting?
Handling an unexpected events gracefully

10. How do you pass command line arguments to a shell script?
scrpt-name arg1arg2.argn

11. which command is used to download web-pages?
wget

12. Which will list the hidden files along with other folders and files?
ls -a
------------------
1. How does ansible communicate with remote servers?
SSH

2. What is an Ansible playbook?
A list of taks to be executed on remote servers

3. What is an ansible role?
A predefined set of tasks,files,variables etc., reuse

4. what is an ansible inventory file used for?
Specify hosts and groups

5. How do you include a variable file in an ansible playbook?
vars_file:my_vars.yml

6. what is the purpose of vault in ansible?
Encrypt the confidential information.

7. How do you specify a condition for a task in an ansible playbook?
when:condition

8. How do you use ansible to remove a user from remote hosts?
user:name:my_user state:absent

9. How do you use ansible to enable a service on remote hosts?
service:name=my_service enabled_yes

10. What does it mean for an ansible playbook to be idempotent?
It achieves same desired state whether executed once or multiple times

11. What time if configuration management architecture is often associated with ansible?
Push-based

12. What is the purpose of the ignore_errors attribute in ansible?
It ignores errors in task and continues playbook execution.

13. In a linux environment, how do you schedule a task to run regularly at a specific time usinf cron?
Edit the users crontab file with crontab-e
-------------------------------------

1. How will you find the total disk space used by a specific user in Linux/unix environment?
df-h/home/username

2. How can you identify the process that is listening on a specific port in a unix/linux environment?
netstat-lntplgrepport_number r lsof-l port_number

3. Which language does terraform use for its configuration files?
HCL

4. What command is used to initialize a terraform working directory?
terraform init

5. What command is used to create and provision infrastructure according to the terraform configuration?
terraform apply

6. What is a terraform module and how does it contribute to modularization in terraform?
A collection of terraform resources grouped together

7. How do you store state in remote with AWS?
S3 with DynamoDB

8.How can you pass variables to a terraform module?
Using command-line flags and within the module configuration

9.What is the name of terraform state file?
terraform.tfstate

10. What is the file extension of terraform configuration files?
terraform.tf

11. Which feature can hold expressions and functions?
locals

12. In which directory plugins are downloaded?
.terraform

13. Which one can query the data from provider?
data source
-----------------------------
1. How can you switch between environments in terraform?
Using terraform workspace select

2. Which command applies the variables defined in a .tfvars file?
terraform plan-var-file=variables.tfvars and terraform apply-var-file=variables.tfvars

3. What is the server side error?
5XX

and client side is 4XX

4. why use separate repositories for different terraform configurations?
To isolate environments and manage code independently.

5. Which provisioner runs a local script on the machine where terraform in executed?
local-execute

6. What is the purpose of the remote-exec provisioner in terraform?
to execute commands on a remote resources

7. Which attribute is mandatory when defining an EC2 instance in terraform?
AMI

8. What is the default CIDR block for a newly created VPC?
10.0.0.0/16

9. What is dynamic block?
A block that should be iterated

10. What is an internet gateway in AWS?
A resource allow VPC communication with the internet

11. What should a basic VPC module include?
VPC, subnets, route tables and internet gateway

12. When developers updates it how to get updates?
terraform init-upgrade
----------------------------------
1. What does git rebase do?
Apply commits on top of another branch

2.What command would you use to undo a specific commit without losing subsequent work?
Git revert

3. What is the main advantage of feature branching?
Isolate development of new features

5. What is the purpose of a release branch in Git flow?
Prepare code for production

6.What is the primary purpose of a code review?
Ensure code quality

7. What is an artifact in a jenkins pipeline?
Build output

8. What is the purpose of a jenkins CICD job?
Automate testing and deployment

9. What is Nexus used for in a CI/CD Pipeline?
Artifact repository

10. What is the main purpose of a pull request in Git?
Request code review and merge

11. What is the syntax for writing a jenkins pipeline?
Groovy

12. How can you configure a job to run at a specific time in jenkins?
Using cron syntax in "Build triggers"

13. What is the purpose of a SonarQube?
Define code quality criteria

14. What is the best way to secure jenkins?
Use Role-based Access Control(RBAC)

15. Which Jenkins directory is essential to back up for configuration and job data?
/var/lib/jenkins

16.What is a common issue with long-running jenkins jobs?
Resource exhaustion
---------------------------------------




